good evening Frank thank you very much
indeed for your warm introduction it's a
great pleasure and a privilege to be
here Tim Wellington I know did a superb
warm-up act last week so I just hope
that what I'm going to tell you will
continue that theme are just folks
already very kindly introduced me I
better just say that this is the slide
that I'd like you to look at briefly
Edward Jenner as you have heard last
week is one of the great figures one of
the great godlike figures in the history
of medicine there's true science but I
should look at that picture and ask is
this the picture of a saint is this the
face of a saint or is it the face of
somebody rather more sinister quick
words to explain why I'm here I mean my
background is indeed in endocrinology
diabetes and obesity and my research
group up in Liverpool was grappling with
some of the biggest issues in obesity
the first one is shown here this is how
did this chap get into the state and the
second big question is shown here -
which way was he facing when the
photograph was taken there moving
rapidly on we now live in the center of
the known universe this is the tiny
village of Rockhampton indicated by the
red dot here out in the wilds of South
Gloucestershire and it's about five
miles south of the town of Berkeley
which as you would have heard last week
is where Edward Jenner was born where he
worked where he lived and died and where
he's buried today just out of interest
this is roughly the bit to the right of
the River Severn is Jenna's catchment
area they covered about 2,000 square
miles and when Jenner did his house
visits he'd set off on horseback and he
would very often stay with the patient's
family overnight and he was a great and
very entertaining person so I think a
house visit from dr. Edward Jenner would
have been really quite something
Berkeley is famous in the history of
Medicine and the history of science
because it is where the first properly
recorded vaccination took place this is
the middle of May 1796 as Frank has said
Edward Jenner was not the first
think of vaccinations or even the first
to experiment with it but as you'll hear
he was the first one to drag it into
mainstream medicine and the first one to
really make doctors take it seriously
and start practicing it so this is a
rather fanciful image here this is the
the first vaccination properly recorded
and they if you like the dramatis
personae the cast of characters begins
with a cow called blossom who has been
omitted from the picture and the
interests of clarity and Edna generous
seated there he is scratching a rather
disgusting fluid which originated from
blossoms other into the arm of James
Phipps who is the eight-year-old son of
the genna's gardener and the fluid he's
scratching is from a cow pox pustule
which has just been lanced by Jenna on
the hand of the young woman in the
background there Sara Nelms a rather
upper-class milkmaid James Phipps is
obviously there as the guinea pig and
I'll come back to this image later on
and explain a bit more about the context
but again at this stage you need to ask
why exactly Jenna was doing this rather
bizarre disgusting thing with a rather
filthy fluid that originated from paw
Steel's on the other of a cow called
blossom kook what about smallpox well I
and I see one of my contemporaries over
there we qualified in medicine in 1977
so in a former century not a whole
century ago you understand but feels
like it sometimes and I never saw a case
of smallpox because of all already on
its last legs when we did our medical
training and when we qualified as
doctors and one of my counterparts was
prof of medicine in Halifax Nova Scotia
back in 1914 said the fact is that even
then they'd forgotten what smallpox was
like because it was already being
defeated by vaccination and at that
stage there were still 63 years of
smallpox as free existence on the planet
to go and in that time it would kill 250
million people so in its heyday which is
about two and a half centuries
smallpox was one of the great lotteries
of life it was one of the rivers that
everyone had to cross according to de la
Condamine you had about a rolling three
chance of getting it during a lifetime
if you got it you had on aggregate about
a one in four chance of dying from it so
across most of the planet smallpox
killed about one person in 12 so it was
one of the major killers and about 90%
of its victims were under the age of
five so it was also very brutal very
mesmerizing killer that really had a
grip of fear over a lot of the people on
the planet if he got it only survived he
weren't necessarily that lucky because
you had about a 1 in 3 chance of being
badly scarred and we're not talking a
bit of bad acne here we're talking about
skulls that go deep into the skin that
healeth fibrosis that open up the pits
and some people actually killed
themselves because when they recovered
they couldn't face what they saw in the
mirror as well as a skin being scar that
often got the cornea the transparent
front of the eye and it was one of the
commonest causes of blindness in young
adults in Europe as a result of that so
it's a pretty mean disease and just show
a couple of pictures the little boy on
the left is actually very very famous
because this picture was on the World
Health Organization smallpox recognition
card and when the volunteers were going
out to vaccinate the villages in India
Pakistan and Bangladesh to try and stamp
out the outbreaks of smallpox as they
arose they would take these cards out
they'd go into the village and they'd
asked the schoolchildren because they
were the best at identifying the early
cases have you seen anybody like this so
little boy is in the early stage is
covered in poss tools such a big
blisters filled with milky pus looks
pretty unpleasant the young lady on the
right of the screen there was from Zaire
in the 1960s and she's a couple of
stages further on so those pustules have
dried up she's left a lot of scarring
she's left with a lot of swelling
because the information is still
settling down and because of the
swelling her eyes are tight shut so when
the soda Graf was taken neither she nor
the people holding her up
knew whether she would be able to see
again when finally she could open her
so as a really fo horrible disease it
would be lovely to say that medical
science had risen to the occasion and
came up with a cure but I'm afraid once
you've got smallpox you took your
chances and we as doctors were able to
do very very little other than give
effectively palliative care and let
nature run its course and if you go back
to the 1770s so around Jenna's time
Lynch as were used need to were use for
everything it was one of the doctors
stock trades it did absolutely nothing
for the disease but it was a means of
allowing the doctor to present you with
a bill because at least he was doing
something and the same rent for salts
that gave you diarrhea or the made you
throw up the color red was great it was
thought to protect against smallpox and
sought to cure a smallpox and his a bit
of nationalism for you when one of the
Austrian emperors was dying of smallpox
they sent to England for 14 yards of
heavy red english flannel and they
wrapped him up on the poor bugger
dropped dead on the spot
so that proved that the color red was
not actually that good for treating
smallpox
so mortality again depending whether you
had the major or the minor form of
smallpox was somewhere between 20 and 50
percent in the 1770s so one forward 200
years and the first thing that struck me
when I read about the current care in
the department of health instructions
was that if the patient was female
you should remove all mirrors from her
sick room because being female she might
not have the moral fibre necessary to
cope with what she saw in the mirror
it's a serious this is what they
recommended in the 70s we had intensive
care we had antiviral drugs but put it
together and the mortality even then 200
years later was only slightly better
overall so once you got smallpox
you took your chances as people always
had done so cure doesn't work what about
prevention
well the Ravel is sort of precursors to
vaccination people actually use smallpox
pass instead of cow pox and it sounds
scary as hell but it did actually work
and it had a relatively low mortality
rate about 1 in 50
but what Edward Jenner did is you would
have heard last week if you were here
was that he brought vaccinations so the
use of cow pox rather than native
smallpox on to the scene as a
therapeutic move every gen is one of my
heroes when I was researching the book
he was one of the people I really
enjoyed reading about I'd loved to have
known him he was a absolutely
fascinating chap he was a gentleman
doctor an FRS so fellow of the Royal
Society very serious scientist as a
scientist he was a polymath he flitted
from ornithology to geology to botany he
did all sorts of things he was a
dilettante he never quite finished quite
a lot of experiments and he wrote up
some really dire experiments and was
really gutted when the Royal Society
said this is garbage we can't print it
but he did a lot of good things as well
again great company he played the flute
and the violin and sang he wrote poetry
I think there's just time to give you
one of his poems it was to celebrate the
death of dr. Waite there was a doctor
who had perfected medicinal gingerbread
for killing intestinal worms and this is
a little it's actually a proton Limerick
it scans just like a limerick and it
goes as follows it begins with the Latin
names of the worms a scaredy's timmy's
Limbrick ii and all ye kyle sucking
insects are tremblingly crawl no more be
afraid you're quite safe in our guts for
weight has done making his gingerbread
nuts so Edward Jenner FRS absolutely
wonderful man he goes FRS for nothing to
do with medicine he got it from working
out how the cuckoo chick gets rid of the
other chicks and eggs in the nest and
again it's a great story which we have
got time to go into today general onde
has made some really at the feet of John
Hunter surgeon extraordinary to His
Majesty King George and indeed hunter
you know it's enough material there for
three or four other lectures just
suffice to say he was extraordinary he
was the man that kept Jenner's
scientific interest the float after
Jenna left London and went back to the
quiet back waters of of Berkeley but he
began is where the controlling as an
apprentice to a man called Daniel Ludlow
in the town of Chipping Sodbury and I'll
come back to Chipping Sodbury in a
minute but this is where we have to
think about Jenna's scientific
contribution again this comes in to the
anti-vaccination debate because later
you'll hear that people tried to
demolish Jenna's approach is systematic
scientific approach and they used the
fact that he had been an imperfect
experimenter in other domains to try and
back up their claims so Jenna was
acquainted with an observation he didn't
make it himself he was told by it by
somebody you're about to meet from us he
deduced that cowpox might protect
against smallpox he from related the
hypothesis that if you give somebody cow
pox artificially then that person will
be protected against smallpox he
conducted an experiment which we've
already seen the outline of to try and
see if that hypothesis were true and
that he verified the results by
challenging his guinea pig with smallpox
and again we'll hear about that in a
second and then the Turbots that had
defeated everybody else who'd thought of
this he then decided he would tell the
world about it he would publish his
results he would disseminate his
findings and most difficult of all given
the fact that the medical profession
then was even more stuck in the mud and
conservative than it is today he was
going to change medical practice for the
better so here's where we begin actually
with the observation and again
vaccination is giving people cow pox to
prevent them from getting naturally
acquired smallpox and cow pox was a bit
of a legend it was an occupational
hazard of girls in the milking parlor
and this is what it looked like this is
what blossoms other would have looked
like we've got these rather nasty
pustules and if the milkmaid has got a
cut in her hand then she will pick up
the virus of cow pox and she will
develop very similar looking pustules
because she'll have caught the disease
off the cow and the legend was as told
to Jenna by anonymous milk maid who was
consulting him as an apprentice he would
have been probably sixteen years old at
this time and there was an outbreak of
smallpox nearby and basically Jenna was
to brief everybody that they might need
to take care and this milkmaid said I am
NOT an Elise bit worried about smallpox
because I've already had cow pox Jenna
like all the other doctors of the age
had not been told about this didn't make
the connection didn't do anything about
it for quite a long time but Park the
knowledge and return to it later on the
reason I hesitated with Chipping Sodbury
is that it is desperate easy to say
sodding Tiberi I when I want to give a
talk in Chipping Sodbury that's exactly
what my buddy will did and there were
very very forgiving actually the
inhabitants of Chipping Sodbury are very
nice warm caring forgiving people but it
was deeply embarrassing at the time so
here we have the observation being
presented to Jenna by the friendly
milkmaid in Chipping Sodbury and this
was a start of an experiment that
actually took Jenna 30 years to complete
and we know that he was interested in it
because he belonged to a very
interesting society called the convivial
Medical Society which met at this
building it still exists as the ship in
just off the a 38 at Alveston outside
the town of Thornbury it's very similar
in those days they presumably did not
have very many other tribute nights as
they do today but otherwise it's pretty
well the same and the purpose of this
society was to meet regularly there all
doctors in practice locally they met for
the United purposes of having a good
time and talking about science and
medicine but over minutes there is the
entry by the then chair saying that
they've had a great discussion but if
Edward Jenner persisted in trying to
tell people that cow pox could be used
to protect against smallpox then they
would throw him out of the society so
clearly he was talking about it but not
doing anything and the reception of his
medical colleagues is interesting this
simply did not believe it this was a
legend from the lower classes the
milkmaids nothing to be taken seriously
by doctors or proper scientists
but Jenna finally got around to doing
his experiment and this takes us back to
this picture
so 14th of May 1796 and he is
inoculating James Phipps
with cowpox glass from Suriname his hand
and ultimately from blossom and that
happened was that the lad developed a
small saw at the inoculation site on his
arm he had a bit of a fever and then he
settled completely back to normal again
now general then had to test him to see
if he was actually immune against immune
to smallpox protected against smallpox
and all he had to do was the then
standard medical procedure which was to
give the lad therapeutic smallpox this
was a process called variolation
and again this was the precursor to
vaccination so you think this is
outrageous this man gave this boy not
only cow pox but then deliberately
infected into smallpox but in fact that
second thing although it sounds a lot
scarier was actually the bit of medicine
that was accepted practice at the time
and the great thing was that absolutely
nothing happened
if you evaluated somebody and you gave
them smallpox normally they've got a
nasty ulcer where you'd scratch the
smallpox pus in and then after a few
days you would have satellite lesions
breaking out perhaps a couple of hundred
of them over the rest of the body
and people could be quite sick with it
before they got better but this lad
showed none of that at all so this is
one of the great Eureka moments in the
history of medicine science Jenner had
proved that he had managed to make
somebody immune to smallpox so very
excited he sent the paper off he wrote
this case up and lots of other cases
together real observations of people
who'd caught cow pox naturally and had
not got smallpox
even though they'd had plenty of
opportunity sent it off the Royal
Society and they rejected the paper
jenner was quite easily bruised he was
very paranoid he suspected that they
were out to get him and steal his secret
and in this case they were actually
probably right because the referee was a
seriously evil individual called Evelyn
him so rope jelly did was he did some
more cases I did some more experiments
he wrote them up and he self-published
and it was a paper called the inquiry in
the causes and effects of the variola
vaccine I the disease known as the cow
pox in the countries of England most
particularly Gloucestershire so a long
title it's known as the inquiry and this
is one of the greatest pinnacles in the
whole of the history of medicine and it
was not peer-reviewed and it was
self-published by little print house in
Soho but Roman came out it was an
instant sensation because it was a
do-it-yourself guide to vaccination and
remember the doctors at the time but
never heard of cow pox they had no idea
that it could be therapeutically useful
so what Jenna was doing was he was
displaying this for everybody to see so
this is a wonderful example of open
access publication and the doctors up
till then had guarded their practice
very jealously the very latest for
example had their own private recipes
but Jenna didn't want any of that he
wanted this out in the open so that
people could exploit what he discovered
and use it for the good of mankind and
there was an instant sensation partly
because of pictures like this and this
showed the doctors exactly what the
lesions of cow pox would look like so
that they could then go out and find
material and vaccinate their own
patients to protect them against
smallpox and here's a wonderful example
as to how quickly vaccination took off
and this is a really quite a moving
expedition which was called the royal
and philanthropic expedition of King
Carlos the forth of Spain it wasn't
entirely philanthropic because he needed
to impress the Spanish colonies from
whom the tax revenue was drying up a bit
and what King Carlos King Charles
decided to do was to send this new
apparently divine gift of vaccination to
the Spanish colonies they organized a
little for tiller of ships which set
sail from our Caronia and Ganesha in
northern Spain across the Atlantic and
there the expression split part left the
ship
on the Atlantic side cross Mexico on
foot and horseback picked up a ship on
the other side came back round the back
of the world the other bit went down
through Central America going right into
the heart of Peru and then boats to take
them back around terra del Fuego back
across the Atlantic to home again
and the whole thing took three years and
everywhere they went they were
fantastically greeted as distilling made
again a very very good accounts to read
of this and it worked as a as a
propaganda coup really it really did
work
I might ask how they managed to get
vaccination all the way across the
Atlantic and back round the world an
answer as they started in the local
orphanage in Laconia were they acquired
of twenty orphaned Spanish boys and will
vaccinate four men pairs every ten days
so the first pair just as they left port
ten days later they harvested the nice
juice from those two they did the next
pair they saved the juice and so on so
by the time they'd crossed the Atlantic
they'd taken into the arm to arm all the
way across the Mexican party then left
the twenty orphaned Spanish boys to be
raised by the church popped down the
road to the nearest Mexican orphanage
where they acquired another twenty
willing volunteers and took them for a
trip of their lives around the back of
the world so once well that ends well
and if you then wind forward very
rapidly
I mean suffice it to say the vaccination
did work it was highly effective and it
cleared progressively large swathe of
the planet of smallpox
by the time Jenner had died they'd
managed to clear the province of
Lombardy in northern Italy completely a
smallpox which again was completely
unprecedented
and that process continued and by 1967
which was the time of the w-h-o the
World Health Organization decided that
they could actually wipe out smallpox
for once and for all you'll see that it
had been cornered in South America
sub-saharan Africa southern Asia so
India Pakistan Bangladesh and a bit of
Indonesia and the World Health
Organization again set out on a
concerted global campaign to stamp out
smallpox from those areas using mass
vaccination using careful targeting of
early outbreaks and so on and they
succeeded and Jana's vision of a world
completely free from smallpox which he
predicted within a couple of years of
actually publishing his inquiry was
completely and I rageous thing to
predict but he
he went for it and that vision was
actually realized and the little girl
here was found hiding under a sack in a
village on the island of Bona and the
mouth of the Ganges and she was the last
remnant of a little outbreak of smallpox
which they the local authorities wanted
to cover up because it would have been
at a mission of defeat
because smallpox was so nearly stamped
out and she was the last one to get the
more severe form of smallpox so called
variola major and she survived and is
still alive and well today on the Island
of bola took a couple of years to stamp
out the last vestige which was a little
full of n Claver smallpox in the Horn of
Africa
and the main kind of smallpox there was
actually very own a miner and the last
victim of that was a hospital porter
called a Lima Marlene in the town of
Mercker and Somalia and what he did
wrong was to jump into a jeep which
arrived with a couple of little girls in
the back both the smallpox one of whom
was obviously dying and took the jeep
directed the drive around the back of
the compound to the isolation unit there
was only Jeep only for a few minutes and
one of the little girls died the other
one survived he then went down a couple
of weeks later with this mysterious +
tiller illness which they took ages to
diagnose and even though he worked in
hospital where they dealt with smallpox
even though he was a volunteer
vaccinator himself he would have thought
he would have been vaccinated but he
hadn't been but anyway he survived and
he was the last victim of naturally
occurring smallpox on the planet they
then had to wait a couple of years to
make sure that they hadn't missed
anything and during that time apparently
the phone rang 9,000 times in w-h-o
headquarters in Geneva but luckily there
weren't any further outbreaks so on 4
May 1980 just over 30 years ago the
World Health Organization declared the
target zero in other words a complete
wipeout of smallpox from the whole of
the planet had been achieved and today
this is the only infection that mankind
then a human infection that mankind has
set out to exterminate and has succeeded
in exterminating so
- gender when they're coming into the
anti-vaccination bit so this is all
really good news I felt I had to portray
the positive side here to rev you all up
a bit but we're now coming into the
slightly creepy side which is where
people look at what Jenna's achieved and
look what has led to and ask quite
searching questions about whether this
globally is the right thing to have done
Thomas Jefferson wrote to Jenna while he
was still alive and said basically
you're a great bloke what you have
discovered will get rid of smallpox and
your memory will be the fact that
smallpox is no longer with us that's
great but the centenary issue of the
British Medical Journal in 1896
described Jenner as a prophet without
honor in his own country and this statue
wonderful bronze by Calder Marshall
actually epitomizes that statement and
underlines this how true it was because
it was unveiled in Trafalgar Square by
Prince Albert with much pomp and
circumstance and it stayed there for
precisely four years and then under
cover of darkness one night it was
carted away and you can still see it
today but you've got to go to the
Italian gardens in Kensington Gardens
and the reason was carted away is that
the anti-vaccination aside that it was
morally wrong for Edward Jenner
discoverer of vaccinations to be sharing
Trafalgar Square with the nation's real
heroes the likes of Nelson so he was
topped and if you look at where the
opposition came from well apparently the
old mighty stepped in very early and
took exception to vaccination and people
trolled the Bible for little quotes that
could be used as evidence that
vaccination was blasphemy and they
managed to find for example the story of
Jobe who was the unfortunate gentleman
on the ground on the left and he has
been smitten by Satan with a curse of
boils and the reasoning was that because
the curse of boils probably quite looked
like a vaccination scar this proved that
Satan was actually the first vaccinator
developing that theme john birch took
against vaccination because it was a
terrifically good
retrospective birth control method for
all those poor people who kept having
children and couldn't bring up properly
and smallpox as you know killed off a
lot of kids particularly poor family so
that was Nature's Way of achieving a
balance and for vaccination to come in
and prevent that from happening was
blessed for me because it was clearly
God's will that these unfortunate
children should die in the smallpox
should be the thing that killed them now
that was in 1806 and 90 years later we
have the same thing being being
projected again and basically
vaccination prevents God from
determining who's going to die and when
they're going to do it
so it's subverting the divine plan so
you might be able to pick holes in the
chain of logic in that
I'm afraid doctors are not that much
better and very soon after the inquiry
was published lots of doctors started
reporting problems with vaccinations
lots of them are actually doing very
comfortably with private practice which
was being undermined by Jenner's desire
to bring vaccinations to as wide a
public as possible so for example there
were papers published in reputable
medical journals by respected doctors
which proved that if your child was
vaccinated it would probably turn into a
cow and the picture here is a lad in
Peckham who a few days after being
vaccinated was running around on the
floor on all fours bellowing a little
bumps beginning to appear where the
horns were going through his forehead
and you've seen that the artist has
actually made his face look quite bovine
in outline we also said that I would
give you tuberculosis that it would make
you mad give you syphilis give you blood
poisoning give you diabetes etc etc so
quite a scary list of potential side
effects there and here is one of the
responses to the lunacy of the
suggestion that if you're vaccinated you
will turn into a cow and this is a great
as huge might happening this picture
it's by Gil raves one of the great
political cartoonists of the day and if
you just look at the young lady in the
middle you'll see she looks rather
apprehensive she's got every reason to
look at prehensile because you look
around and see the people have already
been vaccinated and she's in the process
of being vaccinated but
those who've already been there and done
that have actually got bits of cows
sprouting over their backsides their
arms their heads their eyes it's pretty
gruesome spectacle and what Gilray is
doing here he's not trying to point out
the supposed hazards of vaccinations
he's deliberately lampooning the people
who are stupid enough to believe that if
you were vaccinated you were turn into a
cow
unfortunately there was a bit of a grain
of truth in some of the objections and
of that list of things that vaccination
was supposed to cause you could get
blood poisoning because in the early
days vaccination was not a sterile
procedure so you could get blood
poisoning and it could kill you and it
did occasionally and the other one were
people really worried about was syphilis
and again if you think back to that
Spanish orphanage if one of those orphan
boys have had congenital syphilis which
is possible because it was often
clinically silent even in kids up to the
age of ten then that syphilis would have
been spread by anybody who'd had the
arm-to-arm vaccination so in theory if
had been one child was syphilis you
could actually have infected an awful
lot of the Spanish colonies and syphilis
was something that people really were
very afraid of and if you look at this
very unpleasant picture you can see
exactly why people were so terrified in
fact they were often more terrified of
syphilis than they were a smallpox so
this brings us to further opposition
medical-type opposition to vaccination
and one of my anti-heroes I had to
admire her because she was a lady of
immense erudition and energy but she was
quite a difficult character I think this
lady called Laura C little who described
herself as a natural healer an activist
and she wrote a lot and she wrote a book
called crimes of the cowpox ring which
was basically a conspiracy theory tract
pointing out the vaccination was being
inflicted on the children of America
through a consortium that included the
people who made cow pox vaccine the
government officials who profited from
it
the doctors who profited from it and the
authorities who just wanted everybody
under their control and she collected
about three
hundred case reports of people who had
come to grief of some sort after being
vaccinated and here for example is her
case number 30 a lad age seven who'd
been forcibly vaccinated at school he
didn't want that his parents didn't
wanted but he was vaccinated and he died
sometime after that and there were more
medical disasters that were written up
for example a mineral Kant philosopher
he speculated that it cannot be a good
thing to put animal stuff into humans
that's basically what he's saying and
Ernest McCormick a bit later picked up
that theme with a bit of wonderful
mathematics he said it takes a human 21
years to reach maturity it takes a cow
three years to reach maturity
therefore cows cells divides seven times
faster than human cells therefore if you
put cows stuff in to man man's cells are
suddenly going to start dividing seven
times faster they should do therefore
you will get cancer and again you might
be able to detect one or two chinks in
the armor of logic in that argument but
again people believed it and going back
to Laura see little she wrote up this
case here if you make a note of his name
Benjamin Ola wine and plug him into
Google you'll see that he's still out
there being used as a case I'll be the
historical one by the anti-vaccination
is about the risks of vaccination and he
is a young man who looks at prehensile
he's close to the end of his life from
this photograph has taken he's got a
very large an unpleasant soft tissue
tumor sarcoma of some sort growing out
of his upper chest
it was the same side that he was
vaccinated on but it was nowhere near
the vaccination site and it was nothing
to do with the vaccination but again it
made a good story and Laura see little
had the sarcastic footnote to his
photograph said saved from small pots by
vaccination the implication being but
look what vaccination did to this
previously healthy young man the big
names were recruited in the battle
against vaccination so for example
George Bernard Shaw you know for most
writer of the day said vaccination is a
particularly filthy piece of witchcraft
and a fraud Russell Wallace who was in
with the theory of natural selection
just after Darwin and probably at least
in part independently from Darwin he
despite being a great scientist managed
to put two completely wrong things into
this brief two sentences here
he said the vaccination is probably the
cause of a greater mortality in smallpox
itself of course it's rubbish cannot be
proved ever to have saved a single life
also rubbish and if you look at the
impact that these statements had they
probably were responsible for some
thousands of deaths in the UK with
people not having their kids vaccinated
again we'll come back to those
statistics in a moment the thing that
really got people going in the UK was
the clumsiness with which attempts were
made to legislate for compulsory
vaccination the vaccination acts came in
over a couple of decades or more and
they began rather softly-softly they
basically said the vaccination is
clearly a good thing there's lots of
evidence so we're encouraging all
parents to have their newborn children
vaccinated against smallpox that didn't
quite work so in 1853 they made
vaccination of the newborn compulsory
with a fine of five shillings if you
refuse to have your child vaccinated and
that was own beast up five years later
and it was enforced and if you didn't
pay the fine then you went to prison and
I've just think about that they were
described as perverse outcomes but I
don't think that at all perverse I think
they're entirely predictable
this was very socially divisive because
for a wealthy family five Bob was
affordable but for a family closer the
breadline
five shillings of probably a month's
wages so if that couldn't be paid then
the father the breadwinner was put in
prison so you just imagine how that is
going to be received that's just
ridiculous really widespread outrage
civil disobedience used to burn copies
of the vaccination acts in public and
the exceed the anti vaccination League
one of many organizations that sprung up
to oppose vaccination came into
existence at about this time and here's
a flyer for an event they held in
Stanley bridge where they public he
burns the
vaccinations acts and then they had an
auction to raise money for prominent
anti vaccination as to handli
languishing in prison
this actually is where the the the term
conscientious objectors came for because
before they repeal the vaccination acts
they actually gave you Liberty to appeal
to local magistrates and if you could
convince that person that in all
conscience you did not want your child
vaccinated then they let you off but
again that's fine for somebody who's
articulate who knows the game it would
be hopeless for somebody who is
tongue-tied in the presence of authority
who doesn't know what the rules of
engagement on so again very very unfair
finally they were repealed in 1909
so all that actually had a rather
predictable outcome in that there were
parts of the country where the anti
vaccination is actually held sway the
members of parliament were anti
vaccination Gloucester which of course
was Jenna's own County town was one such
Center Leeds Leicester Glasgow Liverpool
and here's one magnificent demonstration
of the fact that vaccination works but
only if you have it if you don't have it
it's not going to work and the right on
the left in the lad on the right were
members of the same class at school and
they met the same index case who was
bring up smallpox on the same day and
the land on the right obviously had been
vaccinated the liaodong were left his
parents who'd been whipped up by the
local MP had refused to have their son
vaccinated with obvious consequences
just going back to Laura see little her
case number 30 was actually her own son
and when you read it it's actually a
very moving description he gives a very
brief clinical vignette so his case gets
only a few lines in this series of 300
cases of medical disasters but if you
jump to the end of this little tract
which like Jenna's enquiry was
self-published there's this conversation
between the mother and her dead son
which again is quite quite moving
reading actually there's a lot of
emotion in there and the bare facts are
that he was her only child and
split up from a husband at this stage so
it was a big big loss he was vaccinated
in September 1895 and he died the
following April so it's a tragedy huge
tragedy you can understand why she was
motivated to do down vaccinations and
Jenna's invention but if you look in a
bit more detail at what happened and
again it's not explicit you have to dig
in and put things together from the way
she describes it but it was vaccinated
in September and got over it he didn't
like it but he got over it he then got
measles which was one of the main
killers of children then and he
recovered from that and then ran up
against the theory ER in April and he
wasn't so lucky
and he died but if you look at what was
happening to American children at that
time then you see that his run of bad
luck was by no means exceptional and at
that time only six out of ten American
children actually lived to count ten
candles on their birthday cake the
others died mortality from diphtheria
was 40 percent if you got it so it's a
huge tragedy personal tragedy for her
and for him but it's not out of the
ordinary and again it's nothing to do
with vaccination this was also a time
when other interests came into the
anti-vaccination argument and
alternative therapies alternative in
inverted commas medicine was in on the
act pretty early and it was partly a
philosophical objection to vaccination
but it was also with the aim of making
quite a lot of money out of the doubts
that hovered around vaccinations whether
it was safe whether it was appropriate
and one of the people who at the very
beginning was the founder of
chiropractic DD Palmer he had a son
called BJ Palmer so Dede and BJ are the
two big names and initials and his
trapped on the science of chiropractic
basically said that all diseases are due
to misalignment also called subluxation
of the vertebrae in the neck and that
includes things that we know would
regard as infections so smallpox chicken
pox which they actually thought with the
same disease diff theory they were all
due to misalignment of one or two
vertebrae in the neck so if you could
fix that get the vertebra back into line
you would cure the patient and if you
read this thing he says it's the miracle
cure I had a patient who was dying a
smallpox i manipulated the neck the
vertebra that was out of line it was
pressing on nerves that was preventing
the body from being nourished
appropriately from the spinal cord came
back into line and the patient recovered
and he says at the bottom very tellingly
replacing luxation so realigning these
vertebrae will cure the patient and give
the deathblow to the vaccine poison
Swindell so that shows rather clearly
where he's coming from and the
interesting thing is if you look on
chiropractic websites today you'll find
that the fundamentalist so-called
chiropractors are still plugging this
line they still tell their patients not
to vaccinate their children because
infections are nothing to do with
viruses of germs whatever they may be
their to do with troubles in the
cervical vertebrae in the neck so the
great vaccination debate come out to the
crescendo of this now I spotted this
sign on a field not too far from Jenner
the other day and it's terrific because
this is a field in which was a great
deal of bull and it's a world of
disinformation it's been going on since
just after the publication of the
inquiry and I don't see any sign of it
actually going away and it is a war of
disinformation so if you look at what
the anti vaccination stuff done I've
given them pluses here according to the
gravity of what I consider their crimes
to be so they use anecdote or that have
used anecdote they're not just
manipulated statistics they've mutilated
them they've bent them they've actually
for example transposed vaccinated versus
unvaccinated groups in tables in the
paper to prove the vaccination gave you
smallpox that's what they did they lied
they committed scientific fraud they
covered things up and they recruited
celebrities like George Bernard Shaw
like Russel Wallace to basically tell
people that vaccination was bad and they
used the weight of their celebrity
status rather than evidence to get that
message across the big problem was that
there are two sides to every debate and
the anti vaccination estat various times
have been guilty of exactly the same
crimes
I don't think they're quite as bad and
that's why I've given them fewer plus
signs but they still have committed
these crimes they've also used anecdote
instead of evidence they've been
statistics when it suited them they've
lied they've committed scientific fraud
they've recruited celebrities and so on
I professor - pious because one of the
greatest examples of scientific fraud
was actually a rather nice
well-intentioned one well they were
vaccinating in India there was a sizable
proportion of the Hindu population who
did not want that donation because the
cow is sacred and anything to do with
cows was just complete taboo and there
was a long past so the Hindu population
not being vaccinated until luckily an
ancient Sanskrit manuscript came to
light fantastic and wellness was
translated it dated back to about nine
hundreds of seriously old and it was on
ancient paper everything and it actually
showed that one of the ancient Hindu
physicians had not only identified cow
pox he described his blisters on the
others of cows but amazingly said that
if you collect this fluid and put it
into the skin of normal people they will
forever be protected against smallpox so
that was great
and English said it's absolutely fine
let's go with it so they went with it
and six months later they discovered
that the paper on which this was written
was artificially aged and further
investigation revealed that it had been
written in a hotel room in the drafts by
the British Museum's
expert on ancient Sanskrit so complete
completely fraudulent totally dishonest
but it did actually achieve an end and
no it's wrong but it worked it's about
the poem Jenna well he has been the lens
that has focused a lot of the anger over
vaccinations so there are specific
things that people don't like about
January wasn't a very good experimenter
but anytime that vaccination is in the
firing line a lot of the aggro a lot of
the antagonism actually reflects all the
way back to Jenna was the guy who put it
on the map to begin with and this is the
picture that I put up at the beginning
and I'll put it to you that this is
actually the face of a demon it's not
the face of a saint this is from a
statue which was commissioned and it was
designed to show Jenner as an energetic
focused man
and this image was taken from the statue
but it's been hardened up because the
people that distributed that image were
actually the anti-vaccination errs and
this was part of their propaganda to
show that Jenner was not a saint he was
actually a hard driven man the charities
vaccinating is of course his own son so
he's doing something obscene and bestial
he's doing it to his own son and as an
example of just how much people hated
Jenner
Alexandre willow who's one of the
anti-vaccination leading lights
basically said that his science was
lousy his experiments were useless and
it's a good thing he's dead actually
because the best thing we can do is to
forget that he ever lived so that's an
example of how strongly people felt
about Jenner and if you look critically
at the inquiry and the way he went about
his experiment I'm afraid you have to
admit that he was not perfect
it was not a perfect scientist it was
very good for the day but again when
such a lot rides on the way that he
conducted his science you have to be
critical about the detail of how he went
about it and how he interpreted it the
inquiries great but it is flawed and you
don't even know how many subjects he
vaccinated because he talks about a
number of adults you don't know how many
were test very later do you remember at
the beginning of July he went back and
gave smallpox deliberate James Phipps to
see if he was immune we don't know how
many times he did that to the other
patients so you can't really say that
they were definitely immune there's a
cover-up because one of his patients
didn't turn up for follow-up today's NHS
that would be because the notes have
gone missing or the appointment went to
the wrong address
in this case is because the boy had died
and he died of a fever what was called
the workhouse fever
shortly after he'd been vaccinated and
it's entirely possible that he died of
septicemia actually due to genna's
vaccination and Jenna did not admit that
the lad had died in the first edition of
the
of the inquiry decebet II it was
impossible to follow him up Jenner was
also very dogmatic and again he was very
defensive when he was under fire from
his critics and he denied a couple of
things were quite important firstly he
claimed that one on vaccination a
childhood would protect you for the rest
of the rest of your life so he denied
that immunity could not be lifelong and
he stuck to that line and so did all his
disciples even when abundant evidence
started to come in that 12 years for
example after being vaccinated people
were getting smallpox and dying from it
so when smallpox vaccination was around
it was done for people at risk it was
done every ten or twelve years and if
there's no break then you were done
again so it was not lifelong protection
but Jena again believed that this was
protection for life and the other thing
he refused to acknowledge that there
were risks and for example when the
suspicion that syphilis could be spread
by vaccination there were 300 English
doctors who wrote a letter to the time
saying that this was absolutely
impossible and Jena wasn't one of them
but he supported that line and they took
a long time to retract even when very
very strong evidence emerged that
syphilis could be spread so I showed you
the people like George Bernard Shaw were
probably responsible for thousands of
deaths by stirring up anti vaccination
feeling by the end of his life Jenner
will undoubtedly have saved millions of
lives but by sticking to dogma and
refusing to acknowledge that people
who'd been vaccinated once as a child
might have to be vaccinated again he
probably indirectly was responsible for
the death of some thousands of people in
the UK so joel is still one of my heroes
and if you go to the the Wellcome Trust
collection go to the rare books which is
on the gallery at the right there you
can see for example genna's diary which
shows that he worked hard but not
desperately hard a lot of the time
you'll find the notebook in which the
thing about dr. weights ginger bread
biscuits is written and his name is
above your head flanked by Hunter and
interestingly by Darwin as you go up the
stairs and I think it's entirely
appropriate that it should be there even
though he
not have been the first to experiment
with vaccinations he was not perfect but
he was the man that put it on the man
and Francis Galton later William Osler
said credit goes to the man who
convinces the world not necessarily to
the man to whom the idea first occurs
and I think that's entirely right so
just to round up we started with Jenna
we've tracked right the way through and
I now need just in the last few minutes
just to introduce an antihero in my view
who was X dr. Andrew Wakefield and the
anti-vaccination is to give the context
are still going very strong today and if
you just google anti-vaccination you'll
discover quite a lot of interesting
things for example those two societies
in America both for very respectable
sounding titles who are putting out the
line that a better baby death was
actually due to a vaccine reaction and
this is an ongoing legal case at the
moment and the evidence as I understand
it is very strongly that this is
actually about a baby but the line has
been put out that this is actually a
vaccination reaction and the term
organizations or two of them that are
supporting this line are the council of
chiropractic pediatricians there's a bit
of a conflict I think between a
chiropractic and a pediatrician I don't
quite understand and will incredibly
respectable-looking
Association of American Physicians and
Surgeons and that sounds like a really
credible global umbrella organization
for medical practitioners in the US but
again from what I've seen things lock
them up make up your own minds but I
don't think it looks terribly good to me
there's also a thing called the campaign
against fraud and medical research it
sounds really kosher but if you read
what they're pushing at the moment they
are claiming that the Gulf War Syndrome
which as you know may or may not exist
is due only to vaccination reactions
that's the only cause for it and also
that the AIDS virus and the Ebola virus
are man-made and I have put down dr.
Vera Scheibner
please make a note of her name and look
her up if you've got time I won't say
anything about it because I'd like you
to do that as a bit of homework and make
up your own opinions about what you
think about her
so dr. Vera and this
built like that that is the proper
spelling Scheibner she's in Australia
and just the link to X dr. Wakefield is
the age of autism this is now a day
non-web newspaper which gives you daily
updates on the new epidemic of autism an
autism has been around for a long time
it's a serious serious issue it's a real
curse on the sufferer and on the family
it is getting very very common and again
there are lots of legal lots of legal
interest and there's lots of specialist
setting themselves up with a particular
interest in autism it doesn't look as
though this epidemic is necessarily
driven by true increased incidence of
the disease and this is where Andrew
Wakefield comes in because he published
a paper in 1998 in The Lancet claiming
to have found a connection between
vaccinations with MMR measles mumps
rubella and the subsequent development
of gut disease Crohn's disease and also
with autism in children and this was
published again in The Lancet so that
one of the top three highest profile
medical journals on the planet it caused
quite a bit of controversy immediately
and it took the editor of The Lancet
he's not here is he think he is
took him an awfully long time talking
about a dozen years to actually get the
thing properly reviewed and critiqued
and retracted and as long-term doubt
thanks to a fairly exhaustive
investigation by the BMJ
who had a bit of a crusade against him
so they may have gone about it with a
bit of extra enthusiasm but I think the
evidence is convincing that this wasn't
just bad science this was science driven
by money and basically as it says there
Andrew Wakefield was hired by a
solicitor to help a group of parents sue
the vaccine manufacturers the fallout of
that is familiar to all of us
much worse than just bad science this is
another long shadow of the
anti-vaccination movement if you like
the arrow there a top is where his paper
came out and this rather busy little
graph the vertical blue bars are the
percentage uptake of the MMR vaccine in
newborn children
and you need to be above that dotted
horizontal line in order for the
population as a whole to be protected by
what's called herd immunity in other
words you've got enough protected
individuals so if a case of infection
does break out then there are enough
protected people to block it and prevent
it from running away and we'll see that
after that paper the bloom bars actually
fall below that threshold and they've
remained below the threshold the most
recent data suggests the now close to
that threshold again but there's very
predictable outcome of that and that is
the red line which shows the rising
incidence of measles measles is a bad
disease many of us I had it as a child I
was lucky it's still one of the major
killers in the developing world of kids
under the age of five
it's an eminently preventable disease so
for an eminently preventable damaging
disease to becoming back in an allegedly
civilized society such as ours in the
21st century tells us two things the
first thing is it's disgraceful and the
second thing is it tells us about the
power of the anti vaccination arguments
compared with the messages that
conventional medicine and conventional
science are putting out so there's
something fundamentally wrong about the
way that we are going about trying to
portray the positive benefits of
vaccination we are appealing to the role
and bits of the emotional circuitry if
you'd like to burn off a lot of people
otherwise this would not be happening so
razors is coming back in the UK and
Ireland and Canada and in France first
quarter of 2011 there were an
astonishing 6,400 cases that's the
biggest number by far for the last
thirty years in France we don't want
things to be heading the way that they
still are in countries where they are
crying out for vaccination against
diseases like measles and in India at
the moment there's great concern because
there's not enough measles vaccine to go
around it can't be distributed properly
and adword in India about a hundred and
thirty thousand kids a year are killed
by measles so in India you have people
crying out for measles vaccine in the UK
we've got people saying no we don't want
it and it's not just their kids
they're putting at risk like the little
lad on the left of the smallpox outbreak
in Leicester it's the rest of society
because if the population is a home
falls below that critical threshold then
we're in trouble all of us but it's not
an easy thing and we're talking about
moving targets smallpox is no longer
with us so it would be crazy to protect
us to immunize us against smallpox after
9/11 the Americans were worried that
smallpox might come back as a
bioterrorist weapon and it would be
quite a good one wouldn't be perfect it
would be quite good so they vaccinated
an awful lot of American servicemen just
in case and that then enabled us to know
what the true incidence of the side
effects of the modern smallpox vaccine
is and it kills about one person in
million but it also gives myocarditis of
information of the heart muscle to about
1 in 5,000 so it's not without risks to
all the diseases are there you have a
landscape that looks a particular way
and you can evaluate the risk of having
the vaccination is probably better to be
vaccinated when the disease is
disappearing then the dynamics can
change and we're talking about not just
the evidence of good versus harm we're
talking about the benefits of an
emotional reaction so whether people
don't like something because it's
against religious principles or because
they think the science is bad or because
they've heard somebody charismatic and
powerful talk about it on TV and it does
come down to the benefits of this
against that and this is an argument in
which the heart often wins over the
brain so just to give you a I'm going to
say a terminal question that's quite the
wrong word you know what I mean a wind
up question what would you do you know
how are you going to react to this and
you need to be able to weigh up the
evidence I presented you one view of the
evidence again I do encourage you to go
onto the website because your
interpretation of what I've put here may
be different just in the last two
minutes I will encourage you all to go
and visit virtually or better still in
person dr. Jenna's house which used to
be the Edward Jenner Museum it's in
Berkeley it is actually his house so
somewhere around there was where he
vaccinated James Phipps
and like all small independent museums
in its financial state is quite
precarious at the moment so any
outrageously generous donations you can
give will be very very gratefully
received the other thing I will plug I'm
afraid is this book it's kindly
mentioned beginning by Frank that I did
five years as Dean and then needed the
year's rehabilitation to recover from
that and I took the air off to research
book on the history of vaccination and
smallpox and it was a great delight to
jump on the bike and cycle 20 minutes up
the road to Jenna's house where the
archives are so it's great fun and why
should you buy this book well I'll tell
you why all the royalties are actually
going to dr. Jenna's house there are
only 87 shopping days left a Christmas
perfect Christmas gift
and that book actually is not that too
bad because it was shortlisted for
Wellcome Trust Book Prize of the medical
Booker award type thing and a couple of
other things and it didn't do too badly
but more importantly it is a book that
may change your life possibly forever
we've told the lot about evidence I'm
just going to close with that a very
important evidence he has a friend of
mine with the book before he's got into
it and areas shortly after so thank you
very much indeed